---
title: Passing the OSCP exam - a Journey
updated: 2021-03-26 20:30
categories:
    - infosec
    - offsec
    - hack-the-box
    - oscp
---

# Introduction
Hello there, it's been a while.  

A lot has happened in during the time this blog was inactive. Besides getting certified as a [Cyber Security Professional](https://www.t-systems.com/de/en/careers/entry-areas/security/cyber-security-professional-program), I also passed the [Offensive Security Certified Professional (OSCP)](https://www.offensive-security.com/pwk-oscp/) exam! In this post I want to reflect on my experience of the course and share what it took for me to pass. I also want draw a rough timeline of what I did as prep for the final exam and which resources helped me pass in addition to the course material itself.  

Disclaimer: Before starting the course, I have had around 1-2 years experience in pentesting in general, though my knowledge and experience was more focused on mobile and web apps. I had a lot of experience with Linux and just a bit of knowledge of Windows.  
95% of the work for the course was done in my free time while working a full-time job. I was lucky enough to get a week off of work for exam prep as well as the time for the exam itself.

# The timeline
**09/2020**
- started preparing for the course
- watched ippsec's videos on older boxes, just to get a feeling on mentality and methodology
- got a VIP subscription for Hack The Box and started working on retired machines

**10/2020**
- lab time started on 11th October
- stopped working on HTB, solely did the lab
  - did around one host per day
- worked through the script
  - started doing the excercises but stopped after the first section
  - decided that the lab report was not worth the time (hindsight is 20/20 :D)
  - ended up using it more as a reference for specific exploit scenarios (e.g. for client-side exploits)

**12/2020**
- stopped working on the lab, ended up rooting 45 hosts and accessing all available subnets
- got back to working on HTB retired machines

**01/2021**
- lab access expired in the first week of January
- learned how to exploit buffer overflows
- got a Proving Grounds Practice subscription around two weeks before the exam date
  - used these boxes as practice for the exam, exhausting all my options before taking hints and avoiding reading walkthoughs
- first exam attempt on 31st January, ended up getting 65 points and failing (and wishing that I did the lab report, hahaha)

**02/2021**
- contemplated life and questioned my skills for a good 3 weeks after the failed exam in an attempt to recharge my energy and caught up on what happened IRL in the last months I was busy with the course
- went through my notes and logs of the exam machines, seeing what I missed and got frustrated with myself again
- made a mental list of what I was lacking to focus on while practicing
- did a few HTB boxes, active ones, to avoid reading writeups and walkthroughs when I got frustrated

**03/2021**
- continued to practice on Proving Grounds, improving my cheat sheets, reviewing my notes and solidifying my methodology
- practiced the buffer overflow a few times on the day before the exam
- second exam attempt on 24th March, ended up getting 90 points and passsing! :)

# Some more thoughs
## Labs
The labs are kind of THE thing to do in this course. I improved my game immensely. I started by doing a basic nmap scan of every host on the public network before identifying a few low-hanging fruits and deciding which one the next target would be. About 20 hosts in I decided to focus a lot more on my note-taking, improving it so that I could re-exploit any of the hosts if I needed to by referencing them. The labs were definitely the most fun I've had in this course!

## Course material
I admit, I've never watched any of the videos that were provided. I skimmed through the course script but ended up referring to it when I needed guidance in specific scenarios.

## Supplemental practice, useful stuff and prep material
- 'Buffer Overflow Prep'-room on [TryHackMe](https://tryhackme.com/room/bufferoverflowprep)
- [TJNull's OSCP prep list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1dwSMIAPIam0PuRBkCiDI88pU3yzrqqHkDtBngUHNCw8/edit#gid=1839402159)
  - did around 90% of the windws and linux boxes
  - watched [ippsec](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCa6eh7gCkpPo5XXUDfygQQA)'s videos on the ones I ended up not doing
- OffSec's [Proving Grounds](https://www.offensive-security.com/labs/)
  - bought subscription for the "practice" machines
  - did all of the "practice" boxes with a community rating of "easy", "intermediate" and "hard"
  - I also did some of the "very hard" boxes but found that they usually required a lot of time for additional research because the exploits were less popular or very complicated to execute
- Priv Esc courses on Udemy by Tib3rius
  - I highly recommend these, they attempt to group different kinds of exploits together, somewhat teach a enumeration "checklist", demonstate different enumeration tools and explain the vulnerabilities you can exploit (also they provide PDFs in light and - most importantly - dark mode :D)
  - [Windows](https://www.udemy.com/course/windows-privilege-escalation/)
  - [Linux](https://www.udemy.com/course/linux-privilege-escalation/)
- [HackTricks](https://book.hacktricks.xyz/)
  - outstanding searchable (also by port number) collection of cheat sheets and knowledge for all kinds of things

## Notes and organization
Taking and organizing notes is critical! I worked with CherryTree and regularly reviewed the notes I took while working on boxes, tagging the notes with relevant metadata (e.g. if the initial shell was gained by exploiting a specific CMS, I would add the name of the CMS to the tags).  
I also ended up creating cheat sheets for reverse shell payloads, commands I use often and specific methodologies for different situations as well a runbook for the buffer overflow.

My notes were detailed enough for me to know:
  - how I identified the exploited vulnerability
  - which exploit I used, which changes I made to it and why
  - the steps I took to make the exploit work (e.g. msfvenom commands, starting a SMB server, etc.)
  - additional resources needed
  - links to relevant blog posts or websites
Additionally, any screenshots I need, would also be placed in the CherryTree notebook.

For each box, I created a folder with the following subfolders that have a specific purpose:
- *recon*: any relevant files I found while enumerating the host and recon tool outputs
- *exploit*: the exploit I used to gain the initial shell, I also saved a backup of the unmodified exploit so that I could easily reference any changes I made with diff
- *post*: any enum tool output and exploits I used to escalate privileges
- *logs*: logs of my tmux session, I logged every window and pane, every command issued and its output just in case I needed to refer back to it later

With all this in the bag, my exam report was written in a matter of around 3-4 hours with the help of [noraj's report templates](https://github.com/noraj/OSCP-Exam-Report-Template-Markdown). I've heard that people submit 50+ pages, mine was just around 30.

## Exam
### The first attempt
I started my first attempt at 10am on a Monday. In the days leading up to it, I was really, I mean REALLY nervous and anxious. On Saturday I bought some snacks but stress-ate almost everything on Sunday...  

In hindsight, the anxiousness is what ended up being my demise (aside from deciding that drinking a coffee at 11pm and then not going to sleep was a good idea). I got really frustrated when I couldn't find anything after 4 hours after nailing the buffer overflow within an hour. It kind of set the bad mood I had even after taking a break and getting some dinner.  

Before finally going to sleep at around 4am, I had 65 points, completely missing a 20-point host and the root of the 25-point host. I got up again at around 7am and proceeded to miss two obvious possible priv esc vectors (didn't have a not of exposure with Windows boxes) as well as not putting one and one together to get the initial foothold on the other 20-point host (that one really hurt my pride). Around an hour before running out of time, I saw one of the two possible vectors (the wrong one, as it turned out) and desparately tried a few exploits to no avail.

### The second attempt
The second attempt started at noon for me. After reflecting back on the first attempt, I thought that it would be best to start later to have two more "equal" blocks of time to work on hosts (13 hours on day one, 5 hours on day two) with a block of semi-scheduled sleep (6 hours) at the usual time for me instead of having just one huge block on the first day. It ended up working out perfectly. 

I had 75 points secured at around 10pm and a rough draft of the report done at 1am before going to sleep. In the morning of the second day, I polished the report to a point where I would just have to correct typos, the content being done. With around 3 hours to spare, I was still missing priv esc on both a 20 and the 25-point host. I decided to go for the 25-point host and ended up getting the exploit to work (first try!) an hour before my exam time ended, bringing my point tally up to 90 points.  

After having a nap, shaking off the inevitable adrenaline dump and taking a few hours to clear my head, I reread the report (a LOT!) before submitting it on the same day at around 9pm.  

Just shy of 48 hours after submitting the report, I received the e-mail that I passed after coming home from work! :)


# What I whish I had known before starting the course
- The [Infosec Prep](https://discord.gg/RRgKaep)-Discord server
  - While the forums were somewhat helpful when I was stuck on a machine in the labs, people on the server generally are more helpful, actually taking the time to listen to your problem specifically, point out what you're missing and pointing you in the right direction without spoiling the solution.
  - the previous statement is also true for any boxes in Proving Grounds
  - After my failed first attempt I got together with two other students in a similar situation and worked on a few boxes together. It helped me identify holes in my methodology, learn from their approaches and generally make a few new friends!
- Actually looting the hosts you've rooted in the labs is mandatory as some hosts require credentials that can only be found on other hosts.
- In my opinion, the labs do not provide enough exposure in priv esc. Most of the Windows hosts do not require priv esc at all or have to be exploited with kernel exploits and the course material does not cover it sufficiently. While this may be realistic, it does not help with the exam. I took additional priv esc courses on Udemy to get a general idea what to even look for. For Linux, I was able to practice enough with the HTB boxes.

# What's next for me?
Now that I've passed the OSCP, had a few days off to regroup and wrote this (very therapeutic) blog post, I've decided to tackle the Hack the Box Pro Labs next. The ones I will be doing are Offshore and RastaLabs.

The ultimate goal for me is to get into Red Teaming and aquiring that OSCE3. So for now, the plan is to do another Offsec certification, starting this summer. The ones I'll be looking at first are OSWE and OSEP.

Thanks for reading! :)